Some of the world's biggest tech giants reported quarterly earnings on Wednesday - with a mixed bag of results as fears grow that a bubble is forming in artificial intelligence.

Microsoft revealed that its spending on AI infrastructure hit almost $35bn (£26.5bn) in the three months to the end of September, a sharp rise compared with the year before.

Despite revenue jumping 18% and net income rising 12%, shares plunged by close to 4% in after-hours trading, with investors concerned about the mounting costs of sustaining the boom.

Microsoft's vice president of investor relations Jonathan Neilson said: "We continue to see demand which exceeds the capacity we have available.

"Our capital expenditure strategy remains unchanged in that we build against the demand signal we're seeing."

Big Tech is facing increasing pressure to show returns on the massive AI investments they're making, against a backdrop of soaring valuations and limited evidence of productivity gains.

Microsoft became the world's second most valuable company this week thanks to its 27% stake in OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT.

Its market capitalisation surged beyond $4trn (£3trn) at one point, but that psychologically significant threshold is now in doubt because of recent selloffs.

Alphabet makes history

Last night's results weren't all doom and gloom - with shares in Google's parent company surging by 6% in after-hours trading.

Alphabet has also set out aggressive spending ambitions, but placated investors thanks to an impressive set of results that surpassed analysts' expectations.

Total revenue for the quarter stood at a staggering $102.35bn (£77bn), with the search giant's advertising unit remaining robust despite growing competition.

But concerns linger that Alphabet's dominance in search could be undermined by AI startups, with OpenAI recently unveiling a browser designed to rival Google Chrome.

Hargreaves Lansdown's senior equity analyst Matt Britzman shrugged off this threat - and believes the company is "gearing up for long-term AI leadership".

He said: "Alphabet just delivered its first-ever $100bn quarter, silencing the doubters with standout performances in both Search and Cloud.

"AI Overviews and AI Mode are clearly resonating with users, helping to ease fears that Google's core search business is under threat from generative AI.

"With ChatGPT's recent browser demo falling short of a game-changer, Google looks well-placed to put up a strong defence as gatekeeper to the internet."

Meta faces a mauling

Meta - the parent company of Facebook, Instagram, and WhatsApp - saw its shares tumble by as much as 10% in after-hours trading.

Mark Zuckerberg's tech empire anticipates "notably larger" capital expenses next year as it ramps up investments in AI and goes on a hiring spree for top talent.

Net income in the third quarter stood at $2.7bn (£2bn) and suffered an eye-watering $16bn (£12bn) hit because of Donald Trump's "Big Beautiful Bill".

Meta was late to the party on AI but has now doubled down on this still-nascent technology - setting an ambition to achieve superintelligence, a milestone where machines could theoretically outthink humans.

The social networking giant continues to benefit from its massive user base, and expects fourth-quarter revenues of up to $59bn (£44bn).

