Is there an AI bubble?

The co-founder of OpenAI, the founder and CEO of Meta, and the former chief executive of Google have all acknowledged that possibility in recent months.

Large language models have exploded in popularity since ChatGPT launched in late 2022, and the stock market has rallied around the accompanying explosion in capital investment. (The Hearst Corp., which owns the Chronicle, has a partnership with OpenAI.)

So while 40 million Americans are set to lose SNAP benefits during the government shutdown, and millions more have noticed their cost of living rise, the stock market keeps hitting all-time highs. 

It’s reminding a lot of people of another time in recent history when stocks were very expensive and much of the market’s vigor relied on a single sector: the dot-com bubble of the late ’90s, which ended with a spectacular burst at the dawn of this century.

We are not good at predicting when recessions will happen, and we can’t say for sure that we’re headed for one now, said John Y. Campbell, who teaches personal finance as a professor of economics at Harvard University and is the author of “Fixed: Why Personal Finance is Broken and How to Make It Work for Everyone.” But the prospect of AI enthusiasm cooling off would likely be bad news for the Bay Area, he said.

“The whole national economy, but particularly the Bay Area, is becoming very very dependent on technology in general and AI in particular,” he said. “In the Bay Area, some people are directly exposed because they work for these companies. But even people who aren’t working for these companies are selling services and products to the people who do work for these companies.”

Right now, about a third of the value of the S&P 500 is made up of the so-called “Magnificent 7”  tech sector stocks (Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Meta, Microsoft, Nvidia, Tesla). Traditional financial wisdom says to never invest in the company you work for — but in a way, Campbell said, everyone in the Bay Area economy relies on the continued success of these companies. Sam Altman or Mark Zuckerberg might not be your boss, but your retirement could rest on the decisions they make. 

And the specter of a bubble isn’t the only threat haunting the American economy. Tariffs continue to be shouldered by American consumers and businesses. ICE raids have scared people away from jobs. Tens of thousands of people have been laid off in recent weeks, many in the tech sector despite all the AI growth. And the prolonged government shutdown — staked over the fate of health care subsidies that would stem some of the massive premium increases on track to happen otherwise — has already yanked $18 billion out of the economy, according to a report this week from the Congressional Budget Office.

“I’m in no way saying there’s going to be a crash or you should sell everything,” Campbell said. “But this is a time to really think through your risk exposure to this market.”

How do you de-risk for a potential bubble bursting? Are there lessons we can take from the dot-com bubble about what people should be doing with their stocks and the rest of their money right now? Here’s what experts say.

What to do with your portfolio if you’re worried about a bubble
There are two main things you can do right now to feel prepared for a bubble bursting: Diversify what you have and be prepared to ride out a market downturn.

If most or all of your holdings are in the U.S. stock market, you’ve captured impressive returns in the past three years. But you’re also exposed to a lot of risk, said Christine Benz, the director of personal finance and retirement planning for Morningstar. She said it makes sense to diversify beyond large-cap stocks in tech to other sectors and potentially other countries. 

When large-growth stocks got knocked down by the dot-com burst, other parts of the market that had been inexpensive in the bubble era suddenly started doing a lot better, she said: “We saw value stocks perform well, we saw smaller-cap stocks perform well.”

And while international stocks usually lag behind the U.S. market, they’ve way outperformed the American stock market this year. It’s worth considering whether global diversification will help you sleep better at night.

If you still have decades left before you need the money you have in the market right now, there’s less argument for de-risking, she said. People under 50 with money in retirement accounts have a lot of time left to recover any losses. 

Falko Hoernicke, a senior portfolio manager for US Bank, said one of the biggest lessons of the dot-com bust was the importance of diversification. Even if you want to keep all your assets in equity, he said, diversify outside of tech and AI. Beyond stocks, there are fixed-income assets and other less risky alternatives.

“Look at your portfolio from a  holistic perspective and make sure you don’t put all your eggs in one basket,” he said. He recommends clients review and rebalance their holdings semiannually or quarterly.

No matter how diversified you are, an AI crash would have an impact on the entire market, said Odysseas Papadimitriou, the CEO of WalletHub. You need enough liquid capital to hold you over so you don’t have to sell devalued equity. He pointed to the recent announcement that Warren Buffett and Berkshire Hathaway are stashing cash instead of investing right now.

Another reason to prioritize cash on hand over investments: If there is a serious market correction, stocks and assets like real estate will likely drop in price, he said. People holding cash will be in a position to buy those things on sale.

No matter how far the market has dropped in the past, it’s always come back and gone on to reach new heights. So keep some of your money in cash, and whatever you have in the market, be prepared — financially and psychologically — to leave it alone if things go south.

Manage your money like a CEO
Outside of managing your assets, there are simple steps you can take today — right now! — to better manage your money. Most of them aren’t sexy, and most of them you’ve heard before. But it’s never a bad time to take stock of the basics, especially if you’re stressed about the short term. 

You want to think like a CEO. Check your balance sheets and make sure your workers are performing at the highest level and all of your expenditures are necessary. Have you seen all the headlines about layoffs lately? Other CEOs aren’t waiting for a stock market downturn to start making cuts. It’s your turn.

Conduct a performance review of your household spending. Time to break out the credit card statement or budgeting software and take a hard look at who’s underperforming. Is your streaming division cutting into your bottom line? Are you paying for a pricey fitness division no one in your family ever goes to? Negotiate with your household’s vendors (streaming services, the gym, etc.) to make sure you’re getting the best deals on your recurring expenses. 
Look for ways to generate more revenue. For some of us, this means picking up a second job or side hustle. For others, it could mean exploring passive investments or income, like real estate or bonds.
Stock the coffers for a downturn. How’s that emergency fund looking these days? Most of the time, experts say having enough to cover six months’ expenses is a good target. If you’re still having trouble sleeping at night, think about boosting it to nine months or a year. If you’re retired or rapidly approaching retirement, Benz said it probably makes sense to have two years’ worth of money liquid. 
Reduce high-interest debt. Once you feel like your emergency fund is ship-shape, prioritize paying down credit cards and other debts with eye-watering APRs.
Maintain a stable investment strategy. Your investment strategy should stay consistent through good times and bad. If you contribute to your workplace’s 401(k), keep doing it. If you want to pull back a little bit of that money to boost your emergency fund or pay down debt, at minimum, contribute enough to get your employer match.
Build your Q4 budget now. Though the loudspeaker at the mall may disagree, the holidays aren’t quite here yet. This is the perfect time to sit down and decide what you’ll spend on gifts and decorations and travel this year. Do whatever it takes to avoid debt this year.

“Think about this proactively rather than waiting to figure it out during the holidays,” Papadimitriou said. “A lot of bad decisions are made during the holidays.”